26th May 2021: observations by the students in San Petronio
On May 26, 2021, a group of students went with Mr Gaetano Passarelli, our Physics Teacher,  to the Basilica of San Petronio, where they could stay beyond the closing time to the public and, for this, we thank Monsignor Leonardi and the custodian of the Basilica for their availability.
The boys were thus able to document the transit of the solar disk on the meridian line.
As it is known, the solar disk enters from the hole drilled on the ceiling of the first left aisle, passing on the floor of the church from west to east (in accordance with the apparent east-west movement, carried out by the Sun in the sky, which in the church appears to be overturned, finding us, in fact, inside a darkroom).
The moment when the solar disk is cut in half from the meridian line, in Bologna it is noon. Local noon, therefore, understood as half the day. 
In this regard, it should be remembered that in Italy, until the whole of the seventeenth century, the Italian time was in force.
The Italic time was the twenty-fourth part of the duration of a day. At that time, however, one of the population's priority needs was to know how many hours of sunlight were still available.
The beginning of the new day, therefore, coincided with the end of the previous day, that is, at the sunset of the Sun: once the Sun set, the "useful" day, the one with the hours of light, was over, and a new day began.
On the sundial of San Petronio, along the west side, there is a numbering (partly with Roman numerals) indicating the Italic time, at the local noon.
When the solar disk shows the solar noon, the indication of the corresponding Italic time indicates how many hours and minutes have elapsed since the beginning of the day, that is, from the last sunset.
In this way it is also easy to calculate how many additional hours of sunlight remain available, which is ultimately the most important information, for those who have to work (at the time, especially in the fields).
On May 26th, for example, the day the photographic shots were taken, as it can be seen in the image, the solar disk crossed the sundial, signaling the local noon, at the Italic hours 16 (XVI, on the sundial) and 1 minute, about. This means that, since the beginning of the day, 16 hours and a minute had passed. However, this information also points to another, more important thing, namely that, from that moment, there are still about eight hours of sunlight (the 24 hours of one day duration, minus the 16 hours already spent), before the sun sets again, starting a new day.
