A few historical notes
In the 10th year issue of “Strenna Storica Bolognese”, we can read about how according to Heroditus, the Greeks learned from the Babylonians, the gnomon and the sundial with 12 divisions of the day. During this period, gnomonics were developing a lot thanks to greek philosophers using scientific methods to improve previous attempts, with rules for building refined sundials on horizontal planes and on planes of various inclinations with respect to the horizontal or that of the meridian. If the plane is parallel to the equator, you have an equatorial sundial, whereas if it is vertical or horizontal, you have a vertical or horizontal sundial respectively. Sundials on flat or curved surfaces can be found in Pompeii and Rome, especially from Palatine.The Romans first divided the day into four parts, and each time it was announced by the reader of the Roman Forum. In 56 BC, Augusto, Q. Marcio Filippo built the first sundial suitable for the latitude of Rome, and in Campo Marzio, an obelisk 37m high was erected in Egypt in the 7th century BC. It is now located in the square of Montecitorio. 
Vitruvius studied all the different quadrants used in ancient times, while Ptolemy researched the geometric problems connected with the calculation of gnomonics. 
There were many portable sundials, and these can be found in the main museums. 
Many sundials prior to the year 1000, are found drawn or built on the walls of ancient English churches. They are generally very simple, often divided into only four parts based on the ancient Anglo-Saxon calculation of the parts of the day. 
Arab sundials were based on the data of the Greeks, they modified them by tracing them on cylindrical and conical surfaces, and introduced equintotical hours. 
In today's era, one of the oldest sundials can be found in the baptistery of Florence, it was most likely built by Strozzo Strozzi in the 11th century. 
In 1467, Paolo Dal Pozzo Toscanelli made a hole in the dome of S. Maria del Fiore (86m high), and in 1756, a gnomon was rectified by  L. Ximenes. 
In 1575, P. Ignazio Danti of the Order of Preachers built a sundial in S. Maria Novella in order to demonstrate the errors of the Julian calendar, and the need for reform, which took place seven years later.<sup><a href="#5">5</a></sup>
The reform was made possible in 1582 with Pope Gregory XIII, and the calendar which took the Pope's name “Gregorian”, is still adopted substantially throughout the world.
