The sharecropping contracts that are part of the heritage of the paper documents of the Museum of Rural Life in Bentivoglio deal extensively with the plantations (Piantate) and trees of the farm, suggesting the importance of this agricultural structure until the twentieth century. Each contract opens with a description of the quality of the farm "grassy, ​​vidato, arborato": the “Piantata” is part of the equipment of the farm such as the house, the stable, the oven. The constitution of the “Piantate” is in fact the work of the landowner who takes care of all the necessary expenses. <br/>
An economic analysis made by the Agrarian Comitium of Bologna in 1880 estimates the costs of setting up a “Piantata” of 35 elms with their vines at 180 lire. The “Piantata” goes into production around the eighth year except for the leaf, so it is advisable to wait for the twentieth and its average duration is about seventy years. The timber obtained from the felling is worth about half of the committed capital. The document also seems to suggest how the “Piantata” is closely related to sharecropping; even in relatively recent times the owner who decides to conduct his land with sharecroppers must give them the possibility of having fuel and construction timber available; in exchange, the sharecropper must provide the labor for the care of the “Piantata”. The sharecropper obtained direct supplies of wood for baking bread and for heating; but also the work tools were up to the early years of the twentieth century mostly made of wood. The peeling of the elms makes it possible to integrate the ever-scarce quantity of forage from those farms that are too unbalanced by ancient tradition towards the production of wheat and hemp and to maintain a large farm even in winter. The grape harvest provides wine, grapes to eat until Christmas, stored lying under the beds or on top of cabinets, and a sweetener, saba. The fruit trees, apple trees, walnuts or mulberries placed in the headlands complete the range of resources of the plantation.<sup><a href="#3">3</a></sup>
